% A ConTeXt document [master document: literateModules.tex]

\startchapter[title=Overview] 

\section{Why is literate programming important?}

This is a very simple start of a seemingly overly long shaggy dog story. 
The ultimate moral of this story is the sum total of how we \emph{do} 
Philosophy, Mathematics, Science and Engineering. We \emph{are 
essentially} building Leibniz's philosophical calculus. (See \quote{The 
art of Discovery}) 

Not surprisingly, then, one of the subtexts of this story is \quote{what 
is (mathematical) rigour}? What can be deduced and what must be inferred? 

A more surprising subtext is \quote{mathematics is programming}, or more 
to the point, \quote{mathematics is the continual creation of 
\quotation{\emph{useful}}, provably correct, programming languages and 
computations using these languages}. 

While there are some noted exceptions, at the moment, mathematical rigour, 
consists of many mathematicians reading other mathematician's linguistic 
arguments, searching for understanding or errors. Our ultimate goal is, 
essentially, to \emph{implement} Leibniz's imperative to calculate, but to 
do so using provably correct methods. However, in this endeavour it is 
critical to \emph{satisfy} the mathematician's need to \emph{understand} 
what is happening, as opposed to simply overwhelm them with 
\quote{meaningless} calculations. For any mathematician, understanding the 
mathematical intent and process of an argument is paramount. If the 
understanding is communicated, merely technical errors in the overall 
argument can usually be fixed if and when they are discovered. Without 
understanding, there is no knowledge of where errors might be let alone 
how to fix them. 

Through out this necessarily long shaggy dog story, one of the key 
distinctions is between those ideas which can be deduced and those which 
must be inferred from experience. The key distinction here will be that 
suitably detailed mathematical proofs of correctness of suitably defined 
deductive knowledge can be computed by finite entities, but that the 
correctness of knowledge inferred from experience can only ever be refuted 
by necessarily limited testing. 

While \emph{this} particular document can not begin to capture these 
ideas, it is important to start as we mean to carry on. While we will 
assume the correctness of the underlying \ConTeXt\LuaTeX\ \quote{document} 
preparation system, it is important to provide a \emph{literate} 
understanding of all other extensions we will use. 

Through the course of telling this shaggy dog story, we will need to 
develop a number of specialist \ConTeXt\ modules to help make the creation 
of mathematical languages easier. Since these \emph{are} intended to be 
\emph{mathematical} languages, we need to ensure that both the correctness 
and understanding of what these tools do, is kept as clear as possible.

\section{Why choose \ConTeXt?}

If the primary task of a mathematically literate philosopher, 
mathematician, scientist or engineer is to create, evolve and use new 
mathematical languages, while communicating intent and understanding, they 
need a flexible environment in which to easily provide new mathematical 
symbols and calculations with which to communicate their argument. This 
was the original intent of the \TeX\ family of text processing tools.

More importantly, one of our goals is to provide an environment in which 
the computation of a \quotation{proof's} correctness, is seamlessly 
integrated with the communication of its meaning.

There are a number of ways in which we \emph{can} implement the 
\emph{calculation} the correctness of a mathematical argument. Currently 
such calcualtions take place in a specialized \quote{theorem proving 
tool}, such as ... Sometimes, these tools provide ways to output the 
resulting \quote{proof} into \LaTeX. However, with this approach, the 
integration of the mathematical discussion with the computational proof is 
very far from seamless or natural. 

We could instead use a mathematically literate text processing tool which 
has been extended with the ability to either internally or externally 
compute the correctness of a suitably formated argument. The \TeX\ family 
of text processing tools provide tools to easily extend and use 
mathematical notation. Unfortunately \quote{programming} inside either 
native \TeX\ or \LaTeX\ is prohibitively difficult. While \TeX\ is 
computationally complete, its \quote{macro programming} language is very 
far from most typical programming languages as to make programatic 
extension of either \TeX\ or \LaTeX\ very difficult except for highly 
experienced \TeX\ programmers. \ConTeXt\ is based upon \LuaTeX\ which is 
the \pdfTeX\ variant of \TeX\ in which the programming language Lua has 
been embedded. This makes adding programatic extensions to \ConTeXt\ 
fairly straight forward. While \LaTeX\ can be used inside \LuaTeX\, 
\LaTeX\ does not yet make any use of the embedded Lua interpreter. More 
importantly, \ConTeXt\, has a much better internal structure with which to 
make use of Lua to add extensions. 

Our approach then, which will only reach fruition after much more work, is 
to use \ConTeXt, \LuaTeX, and Lua to embed one or more extensions of the 
JoyLoL language to compute the correctness of a given deductive argument. 
The JoyLoL language has been designed to \emph{be} the \emph{fixed point} 
of the semantics functor. This means that JoyLoL provides its own semantic 
\quote{meaning}. That is, JoyLoL \emph{provides} a computational 
foundation of Mathematics. Deductive proofs of correctness are simply 
computations in JoyLoL or one of its proven correct extensions. 

While, at the moment, \LaTeX\ is definitely the more popular variant of 
\TeX\ used by the mathematical community, embedding JoyLoL computations 
inside \LaTeX\ is prohibitively difficult. Doing the same thing inside 
\ConTeXt\ is fairly straight forward. 

\section{Why produce another literate module format?} 

The \ConTeXt\ MkII and MkIV modules are already built using an existing 
literate programming format. I would strongly recommend any \ConTeXt\ 
module builder to \emph{read} the MkIV code. It is both well structured 
and well documented. However this documentation rarely covers the 
relationship between the \LuaTeX\ and Lua code used to implment a 
\ConTeXt\ command, nor does it provide an integrated collection of tests.

By using \ConTeXt\ itself to provide a unified description of a given 
\ConTeXt\ module. In one file, we have, intent, documentation, code (both 
MkIV and Lua) as well as tests. 

\section{How to be a literate module programmer?} 

\stopchapter 

